+++
title = 'Time to start building'
date = 2025-01-11T21:00:00+08:00
lastmod = 2024-01-11T21:00:00+08:00
tags = ["reflection"]
summary=""
+++

Despite loving to fixing, optimizing and improving things from a young age, I have a weirdly abyssmal low rate of creating new things. And it has been something I have been ashame about ever since I became aware of it. Why you may ask? Well, it is puzzling for me too.

If you have been through the typical Asian school curriculum like I did for 16 years, you probably would understand me when I said it doesn't really leave much room for hobby if you want to be a top performer. This is especially more true for country that place heavy focus on academic excellence like Vietnam, where more often than not 1 major exam decide the trajectory of your professional carreer forever. Or at least, that is how the narrative goes.

It is no secret that I am a little proud being a top performer in that system. I am, because it was really gruelsome to have to fight through that rat race, where 1 hour less spent on doing practices tests can mean the difference between being celebrate and being a dissapointment. It is the difference between your parents being seen as successfully raising a role model and your parents being seen as neglecting in the education and raising of their children. Somehow, our results has always been tight very closely to the reputation of our parents. It is something that is not as often seen outside of Asia. So yes, I have been through a lot of pressure and lucky enough to thrive in it, so I am proud. But recently, I ask myself: at what cost?

I starts thinking about this more intensely after I read PG's "[A Project of One's Own](https://paulgraham.com/own.html)". To quote PG: 

> And unfortunately schoolwork tends to be very different from working on projects of one's own. It's usually neither a project, nor one's own. So as school gets more serious, working on projects of one's own is something that survives, if at all, as a thin thread off to the side.

I still remember the early day when I first learned how to make my own game. I think it is quite common, if not cliche, for an engineer to get their passion first ignited through trying to make their own games. I remember vividly trying to finish my homework the moment I worked up from my primary school mandatory nap time. I even make it into a competition with my deskmate to see who would finish all of them first. So that, when I get home, I can open up my dad old beat ups work laptop and get cracking at building the level to a game in those drag and drop game engine that run on Flask back in the day. It was a fun time, but it was shortlived. My mom quickly gives me more homework and tuition to do instead, since I seem to have so much free time "to play game". Of course, I don't hold grudge over her for this, she was from a generation very different from mine, so all computer thing is by default "playing game" to her and as with most Asian parents of my time.

When I get to middle school, it was my first time getting to learn a real programming language: Turbo Pascal. It was a magical moment. It was the first time when I learn how to print a Christmas tree programmatically through the terminal on the classic Window XP. I remember spending every afternoon at school joing the IT club and solving very simple DS problem and building cool thing with Pascal like a text adventure game. But once again, my enthusiasm was cut short because I have to focus on the national exam for middle schooler and IT was not supposed to be my "specialty". Math was. Don't get me wrong, I really like math and luckily also perform really well in it. Something that I have always take pride in inheriting from my dad. And to excel in doing math well enough to get into the top 3 specialise performing high school in Hanoi is another gruelsome traumatic period that I wouldn't want to wish upon anyone. So it is not surprising, that I have to stop coding and building thing to focus on my education. 

At this point, you probably have sense a common theme in my story: If what you do don't serve a pragmatic purpose, it is often neglected and replaced for something that does. In another words, my childhood is probably one of the most extreme demonstration of PG quote on what is meant to say that schoolwork is neither a project, nor one's own. And in my case, nothing survive to the side.

When I first achieve pseudo-independent on a full-ride scholarship to Singapore to study after middle school (this is probably the only good thing that came out of all those traumatic grinding), something interesting happens. I am introduced to the concept of Co-Curicullar Activities (CCA). It is foreign to me that students get to do something other than just study after their school ended. You get to pursue your hobbies. Unfortunately, the school I went to was a bit strict in who get to join what CCA due to quota problems, something that still confused me till this day. I was rejected from the school robotic CCA because I could not figure out how to drive the robot through a tube. In my defense, that was the first time I have ever get to control a robot, not to mention have to drive it blind through a tube. Why would reject a student away from joining in something they have interest in because of some arbitrary thing like that test? But I digress. So I spent my time, once again, with nothing to do after school or much guidance on what to do, just aimlessly passing the day while keeping my score up.

It is not until I reach university that is the first time I actually take back control of my life. I rediscovered my passion for programming once again. I started out small, building web applications as a freelancer for researcher from my university. Then, I build bigger thing for my course works. Then, more and more thing as I take on more and more contracts. I feel pretty good about myself. It is like being able to scratch an itch that has been there for 12 years. Unfortunately, that feeling is once again shortlived. I become competent decently quick which means I hit plateau in my skills within a year or two. It is near graduation that I realise, I did not plateau, I just got complacent. I never venture out of my comfort zone after I have become competent at what I am doing. Which means, I never tried to challenge my skillset to build something new and just repeatedly doing the same thing over and over again. It is always felt good when you know what you are doing, until it isn't anymore.

So now that I have graduated, what did I realise? I realise that actually, comparatively speaking, I still actually have not built much. I felt ashame by it maybe because at heart I believe I actually want to grow much better and faster than I am right now. And that usually is only acquired through challenging yourself on building something novel and hard, the very thing that I am not doing much of. Comparatively to all of my role models, which churn out or finish publishing 3 to 4 projects per years. I barely manage to complete 3 to 4 interesting projects during my entires 4 years in university. And I am not happy about that.

So what is next? Now that I have put into words and give it some deep thought about my situation, I realise that the way forward for me is to ensure myself to work on a project a little everyday. Doesn't matter rain or shine, if I just work on a project for 1 to 2 hours everyday, I figure that every 3 months I should be able to consistently producing something that I can be proud about and maybe (finger cross) even useful for other people. It is a stupidly simple plan, but it has been working so far for me. 

I am looking forward to what I will build and learn in the next few months. I will make sure to document everything that I learn along the way, as a way to be accountable for my own learning. So if you are interested, I would suggest adding my blog to your RSS feed, I promise to only produce article of good quality with much thought behind it!
